He was buried with the kings, but he was not a king.
He lived 130 years, but perhaps for the first 90 years of his life there is nothing recorded
what he achieved.
And one major event that was recorded, he had to keep secret without others knowing for
about six years.
Who is this man?
High Priest Jehoeda.
What does Jehovah want you to know about him?
It is this, Jehoeda was loyal to Jehovah even without recognition from others.
So the question to you is, if only Jehovah knows what you do and your loyalty, without
recognition from others, is that enough to sustain you in your loyalty?
For how long?
A year?
Two?
Six?
Longer?
Before you came to Gilead school, maybe it mattered more to you what others saw in you,
what they thought of you, your achievements.
But in class, a deep study of the scriptures opened up your heart.
You looked at attitudes and feelings and thoughts, perhaps hidden there for a long time.
You looked long and hard at the secret person of the heart, which is of great value in
the eyes of God, the inner you.
And this drew you closer to Jehovah.
You felt his reassuring love.
Now more than ever, you realize how much Jehovah sees you and knows you.
Do you not have the same thoughts as we find in Psalm 139?
Let's read the first four verses, Psalm 139, oh Jehovah, you have searched through me.
You know me.
You know when I sit down and when I rise up, you discern my thoughts from afar.
You observe the way I travel and when I lie down.
You're familiar with all my ways.
There is not a word on my tongue, but look, oh Jehovah, you know it well.
You have joy that Jehovah knows you.
He always knew you, but now you know that he knows you.
And you feel more secure in your relationship with him, less concern about recognition from
others.
This was Hyper-East Jehovah.
Now he was born some years after King Solomon's Temple was completed in 1027 BCE.
That means in his lifetime the nation of Israel split into leaving only the two tribe kingdom
using the temple.
He saw kings of Judah introduce idolatry, sex worship.
There were two good kings, Asa and Jehoshaphat.
But remember, Jehoshaphat had his son, Mary Jezebel's daughter, Athalia from the north,
and brought her wicked influence right into Jerusalem.
Things were going from bad to worse.
And in just a hundred years the temple was so neglected that it needed a major repair
just to be structurally sound again.
Meanwhile they built a temple for bail worship.
And Jehoshaphat sees all this.
Here he's an old man, the high priest.
How did he keep his loyalty through those distressing years?
The Bible doesn't say.
But Jehovah knows it all.
Your meditation, prayer, wouldn't he have to look at his own heart, his inner person?
Look at his attitude and his feelings towards pure worship?
Not becoming lax in standing for what is right, unlike high priest Eli when he got old.
And here Jehoshaphat is a man of authority, yet he doesn't step outside of the bounds
of his assignment, but he patiently waits on Jehovah.
Well these years of loyal love helped him face a greatest challenge when he was old.
And this he had to do without others knowing.
What was that?
Well it's around 905 BCE.
And let's pick up the account in 2 Chronicles 22.
Here we find King Ayazaya of Judah has died.
And then the unimaginable happens.
2 Chronicles 22, we'll start at verse 10.
When Atholaya Ayazaya's mother saw that her son had died, she rose up and destroyed
the entire royal line of the house of Judah.
Atholaya kills her own grandsons and makes herself queen illegally.
Now the Davidic line to the promised offspring is at risk of being cut off.
Let's read verse 11.
However, Jehoshabiyath, the daughter of the king, took Jehoash, the son of Ayazaya, and
stole him away from among the sons of the king who would have been put to death.
And she put him and his nurse in an inner bedroom.
Who's Jehoshabiyath?
Read on.
As the daughter of King Jehorm, she was the wife of Jehoyada, the priest, and the sister
of Ayazaya.
And she managed to keep him, the baby, concealed from Atholaya so that she did not put him
to death.
He remained with him for six years hidden at the house of the true God while Atholaya
was ruling over the land.
For six long years, Jehoyada, Jehoshabiyath, and a nurse had a big secret, a small baby.
The last living air.
Now it's possible that this inner bedroom could have been a storage room at the palace.
And when it was safe, they smuggled the baby into a chamber in the temple.
If that happened, imagine the risk, the timing would have to be perfect so they wouldn't
get caught.
And in the temple for six years, do you think there were some close calls?
While at one point, Atholaya's own sons broke into the temple, stole items for bail
worship.
If that happened during this period, imagine if they saw the child, game over.
This means that not once could Jehoyada or Jehoshabiyath let out their secret.
They couldn't complain to others.
They couldn't give up.
That means they had no recognition, no acknowledgement, no appreciation for their effort.
That means they rely on prayer, looking to only Jehovah for support and reassurance.
They would look to the scriptures like Psalm 139, oh Jehovah, you know me.
You can hear them adapt it to their situation.
You know that we're protecting the rightful king.
And they're not just babysitting for six years.
They're teaching the child to love Jehovah, love his law, be a good king for Judah.
They would have to work unitedly as a couple.
And that brings us to her.
Let's talk about her for a moment, Jehoshabiyath.
Clearly, Jehovah gives her the credit for saving her nephew, Jehoash.
But at this point, how old is she?
Well, her father, King Jehorm, who died the year before was only 40 years old.
So she is still quite young.
And yet married to a man, some decades older than her.
So here we have a young woman who is royalty married to a much older man who has a position
of high rank.
What's her angle?
Is she abusing her authority?
Is she trying to manipulate things like her stepmother Athalia?
No, she's risking her life to protect the rightful king in line with Jehovah's will, supporting
her husband and, apparently, without recognition from others.
She reminds us of you, dear sisters, much of what you achieve may not be as noticeable
as your husband's achievements.
And that could just be the nature of the assignment, which means you may get less attention.
But you take pleasure in that Jehovah knows all that you do for him.
And we love you for that.
So you brothers, many things you do will be noticed.
There may be some things where you won't get recognition, perhaps for a long time.
And by the way, it's not wrong to get recognition.
As humans, we thrive on it.
And if you're ever in a position where you can recognize the good work or loyalty of
someone else, don't pass it up.
Let them know.
They appreciate it.
However, your loyalty is based on not what others will see and know, but on the unseen.
Loyalty from the heart.
Remember Jeholyada.
Yes, eventually everybody found out what he did, and he got honor.
But what was the secret to his success?
Was it not in the years before the small things, the hidden things, the unseen, things only
Jehovah knows?
And name Jeholyada means, may Jehovah know how fitting, may Jehovah know all your loyal
acts.
Seen and unseen, and your father who looks on in secret will repay you.